Add 2201.8.0 release note to release branch (#7801)
ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website: downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.8.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md

---
layout: ballerina-left-nav-release-notes
title: 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake) 
permalink: /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0/
active: 2201.8.0
redirect_from: 
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0-swan-lake/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0-swan-lake
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes
---

> ## Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake 2201.8.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake Update 8 (2201.8.0)
```

Reviewer 2: +1

> <em>2201.8.0 (Swan Lake Update 8) is the eighth update release of Ballerina Swan Lake, and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, standard library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2023R1 version of the Language Specification.</em> 

Author: Changed to `Ballerina library`.

## Update Ballerina

Update your current Ballerina installation directly to 2201.8.0 using the [Ballerina Update Tool](/learn/cli-documentation/update-tool/) as follows.

1. Run `bal update` to get the latest version of the Update Tool.
2. Run `bal dist update` to update to this latest distribution.

## Install Ballerina

If you have not installed Ballerina, download the [installers](/downloads/#swanlake) to install.

> >**Info:** From this release onwards, you can verify Ballerina artifacts using the Cosign CLI and Rekor APIs. For more information, see [Verify Ballerina artifacts](/downloads/verify-ballerina-artifacts).

Reviewer: We mentioned the same in update 7 too. So do we need this?

Author: Removed.

        string name;
        int id?;
    };

    public function main() {
        Person person = {name: "May"};
        Employee employee = person; // Compilation error now.

        io:println(person is Employee); // Prints `false` now.
    }
    ```

- Analysis in the `init` method of an `isolated` object has been updated to disallow invalid transferring in/out of values that violated the isolated root invariant.

    ```ballerina
    type Node record {|
        readonly string path;
        map<string[]>? app = ();
    |};

    isolated class Class {
        private Node node;
        private Node[] arr = [];

        function init(Node node) {
            self.node = node.clone();

            self.arr.push(node); // Compilation error now.
            self.arr[0] = node; // Compilation error now.
        }
    }
    ```

- Mutable objects have been disallowed in annotations.

    ```ballerina
    type Validator object {
        function validate(anydata data) returns error?;
    };

    type AnnotationData record {|
        string name;
        Validator validator;
    |};

    annotation AnnotationData config on type; // Compilation error now.
    ```
    

> - Fixed a bug that allowed using field access with a map of `xml`. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Disallowed using field access with a map of `xml`. This was previously allowed incorrectly.
```

    ```ballerina
    map<xml> m = {a: xml `foo`};
    xml x = check m.a; // Compilation error now.
    ```

> - Ballerina interoperability implementation may have an impact with the Java 17 support due to any incompatible changes. For example, Java 17 has some restrictions on using Java reflections with internal Java packages. For more information, see the Java 17 release notes.

Reviewer: Without having this in-between compiler changes, better to add it before.

Reviewer: Don't we have a linke for Java 17 release note?

Author: Added the link. Moved the point on Java 17 to the top.

> - Ballerina interoperability implementation may have an impact with the Java 17 support due to any incompatible changes. For example, Java 17 has some restrictions on using Java reflections with internal Java packages. For more information, see the Java 17 release notes.

Reviewer 3: Is this worded correctly? What we are trying to say is the change to Java 17 may have an impact on Ballerina interoperability? And it's not Ballerina interoperability implementation?

```suggestion
- The switch to Java 17 may have impact on Ballerina interoperability usage if there are incompatible changes. For example, Java 17 has some restrictions on using Java reflection with internal Java packages. For more information, see the Java 17 release notes.
```

Author: Updated.

- A bug that permitted uninitialized variables to evade detection when utilizing the `on fail` clause has been fixed.

>   ```ballerina

Reviewer: Seems the code block is not properly formatted.

Author: Fixed.

  public function main() {
    int resultInt;
    transaction {
        resultInt = check calculateDefaultValue(true);
        check commit;
    } on fail {
        io:println("Failed to initialize resultInt");
    }
    resultInt += 1; // Compilation error now.
  }
  ```

> - A bug that resulted incorrect type inference within query expressions when there is no expected type has been addressed. Previously, when iterating over a map without explicitly specifying an expected type, the resulting type of the query expression was erroneously inferred as an array. This misinterpretation has now been rectified and is properly restricted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- A bug that resulted in incorrect type inference within query expressions when there is no expected type has been addressed. Previously, when iterating over a map without explicitly specifying an expected type, the resulting type of the query expression was erroneously inferred as an array. This misinterpretation has now been rectified and is properly restricted.
```

Author: Fixed.

> - ```ballerina

Reviewer: Why having bullet for code too?

Author: Removed.

>   function filterEmployeesByDepartment(map<Employee> employees, string department) {

Reviewer: Not formatted properly

Author: Fixed.

    var result = from var e in employees // Compilation error now.
        where e.department == department
        select e.name;
  }
  ```

- A bug that allowed ignoring possible completion with an error when using the `collect` clause in a query expression has been fixed.
 

> - ```ballerina

Reviewer: ditto

Author: Removed.

>   function calculateTotalSalary(stream<Employee, error?> strm, string dept) {

Reviewer: Code is not properly formatted.

Author: Fixed.

    3d|4f|6 b = 4; // Compilation error now, `4` is considered to be `int`.
    ```

- A bug that allowed an `anydata` value to be used in contexts expecting an `anydata & readonly` value has been fixed.

    ```ballerina
    public function main() {
        anydata a = [];
        anydata & readonly b = a; // Compilation error now.
    }
    ```
  
- A bug that allowed using object type inclusion with a `readonly` `service` object in a `readonly` non-`service` class has been fixed.

    ```ballerina
    public type A readonly & service object {
        isolated remote function execute() returns int;
    };
  
    readonly client class B {
        *A; // Compilation error now.
  
        isolated remote function execute() returns int {
            return 2;
        }
    }
    ```

- A bug that caused the runtime error messages to include the flattened representation of a union type instead of the name used in the type definition has been fixed.
  
    ```ballerina
    type AC map<int>|string;
    
    public function main() returns error? {
        map<anydata> x = {a: "Ballerina"};
        AC|boolean _ = check x.cloneWithType();
    }
    ```
  

> - A bug that resulted in an incorrect value when using a global variable, as a default value for the class field and function parameter has been fixed.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A bug that resulted in an incorrect value being used as the default value of a class field when the default value refers to a module-level variable that is also used in the default value of a function parameter has been fixed.
```

cc @chiranSachintha 

We need to use proper terms (module-level, not global).

Reviewer 4: Fixed with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/7849

    
    ```ballerina
    import ballerina/io;
    
    final int value = 100;
    
    class Foo {
        int i = value;
    }
    
    function bar(int k = value) returns int {
        return k;
    }
    
    public function main() {
        Foo foo = new;
        io:println(foo.i); // Prints `100` now.

>     }

Reviewer 4: Update the test with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/7849

    ```

>     This now fails with `"'map<anydata>' value cannot be converted to '(AC|boolean)'"` instead of `"'map<anydata>' value cannot be converted to '(map<int>|string|boolean)'"`.

Reviewer 3: This should come under the previous bullet point.

Author: Fixed.

- Modified the behavior of the [runtime Java APIs to support the intersection type](/downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.8.0#intersection-type-support-in-runtime-java-apis).

- Modified the behavior of the Semantic API `typeDescriptor()` methods to return the intersection type symbol instead of the effective type symbol (i.e., the symbol of the corresponding non-intersection type that is computed to represent the same value space).

>     ```ballerina

Reviewer: Not properly highlighted in preview page.

    // `TypeSymbol` of `A` will now be an `IntersectionTypeSymbol` instead of `ArrayTypeSymbol`.
    type A int[] & readonly;
    ```

> - Removed the support for the `AES/GCM/PKCS5Padding` encryption algorithm from the `crypto` package.

Reviewer: Why removing? Isn't it a deprecation we need to do? Anyway we better mention the reason if we remove @shafreenAnfar / @daneshk

Reviewer 5: The Crypto module is using the Java implementation underneath. This is now removed because Java 17 removed support for this algorithm.

Reviewer 5: @MohamedSabthar FYA

Author: Fixed via https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/7801#discussion_r1332545952.

> - Removed the support for the `AES/GCM/PKCS5Padding` encryption algorithm from the `crypto` package.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
- Removed support for the AES/GCM/PKCS5Padding encryption algorithm due to its incompatibility with Java 17 in the crypto package.
```

Reviewer 6: @ThisaruGuruge, Added a suggestion including the reason

> ## Platform updates

Reviewer: Why the following topics are going as platform updates? These are language updates?

### New features

#### Introduction of list constants

The language now supports list constants. You can declare a constant variable using a list constructor as shown below.

```ballerina
const int[] ERROR_CODES = [404, 500, 503];
const ERROR_MESSAGES = ["Not Found", "Internal Server Error", "Service Unavailable"];
```

Also, you can declare a list constant using a byte array literal.

```ballerina
const byte[] data16 = base16 `55 EE 66`;
const data64 = base64 `ABCD pqrs`;
```

### Improvements

#### Make `async-send` an action

Reclassified `async-send` from a statement to an action in alignment with the Ballerina specification.

The following case is now supported.

```ballerina
public function main() {
    worker w1 {
        _ = 5 -> w2;
    }

> }

Reviewer 7: Sure. I will update

> public function main() {
>     worker w1 {
>         _ = 5 -> w2;
>     }
> }

Reviewer 7: ```suggestion
public function main() {
    worker w1 {
        _ = 5 -> w2;
    }

    worker w2 {
        _ = <- w1;
    }
}
```

Reviewer 7: @MaryamZi @praneesha Is that okay?

## Runtime updates

### New features

#### New Runtime Java APIs

Introduced the `Type getImpliedType(Type)` API in the `io.ballerina.runtime.api.utils.TypeUtils` class to recursively resolve type reference types (to get referred types) and/or intersection types (to get effective types).

    ```ballerina
    // `getImpliedType` on type A returns a `BArrayType`. This is achieved by first retrieving the referred type of the type reference type, which will be an intersection type, and then retrieving the effective type of the intersection type.
    type A int[] & readonly;
    ```

#### Ballerina Profiler (experimental)

Introduced the `profile` CLI command, which runs a Ballerina package and does a CPU profile of it during runtime.

```
$ bal profile
```

- For example, if we run the above command in the root directory of a Ballerina package, it generates a flame graph that shows the time taken to execute each function.

- The output is given by the `ProfilerOutput.html` file, which can be opened using a web browser.

> >**Note:** This is an experimental feature, which supports only a limited set of functionality.

Author: Having `which` is correct in this case as it is a description of the `experimental feature`.

### Improvements

#### Java 17 support

> Ballerina now supports code compilation and execution with Java 17.

Reviewer: We better have more details on why, impact to the user etc.

Author: @warunalakshitha

Reviewer 8: We have two sections mentioned about Java 17 support. Shall we add one sections under runtime improvement.

As an example

Java 17 support
The Java 11 Long term Support (LTS) active support will end in September 2023. Therefore, the jBallerina runtime is now upgraded to support [Java 17 LTS](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase/jdk17-archive-downloads.html), which is the latest long-term support release of the Java SE platform.

Users will not have an impact on the Java version upgrade except for the following.

If you are specifically using Java 11 to run Ballerina programs, you would have to switch to Java 17.

Ballerina interoperability implementation will have an impact on Java 17 support due to any incompatible changes. As an example, Java 17 will have some restrictions on using Java reflections with internal Java packages.

For more information, see the [Java 17 release notes](https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase/17-relnote-issues.html).

Reviewer 8: Also is it ok to use oracle release note as the link https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase/17-relnote-issues.html @anupama-pathirage . Anyway I couldn't found any other proper release note.

Reviewer: I think we still have to mention it in two places.

1. in Backward-incompatible changes section - There we can have only a summary but better link to the more detailed description which is available under runtime section.
2. in the improvements section of runtime udpates- This is the detailed version. 

So +1 to have the detailed version suggested by @warunalakshitha above under the improvements section of runtime updates

Reviewer: > Also is it ok to use oracle release note as the link https://www.oracle.com/java/technologies/javase/17-relnote-issues.html @anupama-pathirage . Anyway I couldn't found any other proper release note.

+1

Author: Updated.

Reviewer: In the backward incompatibility section writup link to the improvements section of runtime updates instead to the https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/blob/85e25044962b792fca8f6e33b4e180592d87a383/downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/swan-lake-2201.8.0/RELEASE_NOTE.md#java-17-support

Author: Why should we point to the `Improvements` section rather than the specific `Java 17 support` section?

Reviewer: yes, that is what i meant by improvements section in high-level (specifically toJava 17 support title)

Reviewer: Sorry my bad, seems it is already pointed to the correct link.

#### Support large list and mapping constructors

> The number of members supported in a list constructor expression and the number of fields supported in a mapping constructor expression have been increased to create new array, tuple, map, and record values that are larger in size.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The number of members supported in a list constructor expression and the number of fields supported in a mapping constructor expression have been increased to create new array, tuple, map, and record values that are larger in size.
```

> The number of members supported in a list constructor expression and the number of fields supported in a mapping constructor expression have been increased to create new array, tuple, map, and record values that are larger in size.

Reviewer 3: No, we only emphasize keywords, variable names, etc., right? `map` is a keyword, but in this context with the rest, even that doesn't need to be emphasized, IMO.

For example, if an intersection type is defined in the following way,

```ballerina
type ReadonlyIntArray readonly & int[];

ReadonlyIntArray array = [1, 2, 3, 4];
```

the results of the runtime API calls will be as follows.

| **Runtime API call**                                   | **Result**                                                     |
|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `array.getType()`                                      | This will return an `IntersectionType` instead of `ArrayType`. |
| `getDescribingType()` on `ReadonlyIntArray` type       | This will return an `IntersectionType` instead of `ArrayType`. |
| `getImpliedType()` on received `IntersectionType` type | This will return an `ArrayType`.                               |      

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.8.0+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed).

> ## Standard library updates

Reviewer: We no longer say Standard library. It should be Ballerina library.

Author: Fixed.

### New features

#### `mqtt` package
- Introduced the `mqtt` standard library package, which provides an implementation to interact with message brokers using the MQTT protocol.

#### `java.jms` package
- Introduced the `java.jms` standard library package, which provides an implementation to interact with message brokers using the JMS protocol.

#### `graphql` package

> 

Reviewer 3: Inconsistent new lines.

Author: Fixed.

> - Introduced the `DataLoader` functionality.

Author: @ThisaruGuruge @DimuthuMadushan @MohamedSabthar

> - Introduced the `DataLoader` functionality.

Reviewer 5: The dataLoader example would be long. I don't think we can fit it in here. Instead, we can add an example to the release blog. WDYT?

> - Introduced the `DataLoader` functionality.

Reviewer 6: The DataLoader example is a complex one, and we won't be adding it here. However, we could include it in the release blog

> - Introduced the `DataLoader` functionality.

Reviewer: IMO, blog should be more concise than release note.

> - Introduced the `DataLoader` functionality.

Reviewer 5: In that case, we can add an example here. @MohamedSabthar shall we add one here?

> - Introduced the `DataLoader` functionality.

Reviewer 6: Added with https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-dev-website/pull/7850

- Added support for printing the GraphiQL URL to `stdout`.
- Added support for generating a subgraph SDL schema at compile time.

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%222201.8.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Developer tools updates

### New features

#### Language Server

- Add custom completions for HTTP services.

#### CLI

- Added a new `bal tool` command to manage tools that extend the functionality of the CLI. Tools can be pulled from the Ballerina Central and are managed using the `bal tool` command. For more information, see [Tool commands](https://ballerina.io/learn/cli-documentation/cli-commands/#tool-commands).

#### OpenAPI tool
- Added support to generate Ballerina client and service declarations from OpenAPI v3.1.x definitions.

### Improvements

#### Language Server

- Suggest Ballerina Central packages when they are partially typed.
- Improve sorting in the record type descriptor node context.
- Introduce a code action to add local module dependencies to the `Ballerina.toml` file.

> - Introduce a code action to change the variable type of a `let` expression.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Introduce a code action to change the type of a variable in a `let` expression.
```

Author: Updated.

- Introduce a code action to create a function for the expression of a `select` clause.
- Improve completions in the service declaration node context.

> - Improved the LS simulator.

Reviewer 3: Improve? I would actually change the rest to this form.

Author: Updated. The guideline is to use past tense in the release note to give the idea that it is already done in the release.

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake) of the repositories below.

- [Language Server](https://github.com/orgs/ballerina-platform/projects/356/views/55?filterQuery=task-approved%3AYes+release%3A%22Swan+Lake+-+U8%22+subteam%3ALS+label%3A%22Type%2FBug%22+status%3ADone)
- [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/openapi-tools/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+2201.8.0%22+is%3Aclosed)

## Ballerina packages updates

### New features

> Added support for custom package repositories for dependency resolution. This feature enables configuring commonly used package repositories to publish Ballerina libraries and to use them in Ballerina projects. 

Author: Fixed.

- Modified the behavior of the Semantic API `typeDescriptor()` methods to return the intersection type symbol instead of the effective type symbol (i.e., the symbol of the corresponding non-intersection type that is computed to represent the same value space).
    ```ballerina
    // `TypeSymbol` of `A` will now be an `IntersectionTypeSymbol` instead of `ArrayTypeSymbol`.
    type A int[] & readonly;
    ```

- Removed the support for the `AES/GCM/PKCS5Padding` encryption algorithm from the `crypto` package.

## Platform updates

### New features

#### Introduction of list constants

The language now supports list constants. You can declare a constant variable using a list constructor as shown below.

```ballerina
const int[] ERROR_CODES = [404, 500, 503];
const ERROR_MESSAGES = ["Not Found", "Internal Server Error", "Service Unavailable"];
```

Also, you can declare a list constant using a byte array literal.

```ballerina
const byte[] data16 = base16 `55 EE 66`;
const data64 = base64 `ABCD pqrs`;
```

### Improvements

#### Make `async-send` an action

> 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
```

The following case is now supported.

```ballerina
public function main() {
    worker w1 {
        _ = 5 -> w2;
    }
}
```

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3ATeam%2FCompilerFE+milestone%3A2201.8.0+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Runtime updates

### New features

#### New Runtime Java APIs

Introduced the `Type getImpliedType(Type)` API in the `io.ballerina.runtime.api.utils.TypeUtils` class to recursively resolve type reference types (to get referred types) and/or intersection types (to get effective types).

```ballerina
// `getImpliedType` on type A returns a `BArrayType`. This is achieved by first retrieving the 
// referred type of the type reference type, which will be an intersection type, and then, 
// retrieving the effective type of the intersection type.
type A int[] & readonly;
```

#### Ballerina Profiler (experimental)

Introduced the `profile` CLI command, which runs a Ballerina package and does a CPU profile of it during runtime.

```
$ bal profile
```

> - For example, if we run the above command in the root directory of a Ballerina package, it generates a flame graph that shows the time taken to execute each function.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- For example, if you run the above command in the root directory of a Ballerina package, it generates a flame graph that shows the time taken to execute each function.
```

For example, if an intersection type is defined in the following way,

```ballerina
type ReadonlyIntArray readonly & int[];

ReadonlyIntArray array = [1, 2, 3, 4];
```

the results of the runtime API calls will be as follows.

| **Runtime API call**                                   | **Result**                                                     |
|--------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------|
| `array.getType()`                                      | This will return an `IntersectionType` instead of `ArrayType`. |
| `getDescribingType()` on `ReadonlyIntArray` type       | This will return an `IntersectionType` instead of `ArrayType`. |
| `getImpliedType()` on received `IntersectionType` type | This will return an `ArrayType`.                               |      

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+milestone%3A2201.8.0+label%3ATeam%2FjBallerina+label%3AType%2FBug+is%3Aclosed).

## Standard library updates

### New features

> #### `mqtt` package
> - Introduced the `mqtt` standard library package, which provides an implementation to interact with message brokers using the MQTT protocol.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
#### `mqtt` package

- Introduced the `mqtt` standard library package, which provides an implementation to interact with message brokers using the MQTT protocol.
```

> #### `java.jms` package
> - Introduced the `java.jms` standard library package, which provides an implementation to interact with message brokers using the JMS protocol.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
#### `java.jms` package

- Introduced the `java.jms` standard library package, which provides an implementation to interact with message brokers using the JMS protocol.
```

#### `graphql` package

- Introduced the `DataLoader` functionality.

### Deprecations

#### `graphql` package

- Deprecated the `executeWithType()` method of the `graphql:Client`.

### Improvements

#### `graphql` package

- Added support for the `@deprecated` directive to output objects defined using record types.
- Added support for printing the GraphiQL URL to `stdout`.
- Added support for generating a subgraph SDL schema at compile time.

> #### `log` package
> - Made adjustments to the behavior of the log print functions when an error object is provided for the `error` key. In the previous version, it would only display the error message. However, in the updated version, it now provides more detailed information, including both the error message and the stack trace for the current error, as well as any underlying errors that contributed to the current error.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
#### `log` package

- Made adjustments to the behavior of the log print functions when an error object is provided for the `error` key. In the previous version, it would only display the error message. However, in the updated version, it now provides more detailed information, including both the error message and the stack trace for the current error, as well as any underlying errors that contributed to the current error.
```

- Removed the extra space that was printed between the key and value when printing in logFMT format.

> #### `persist` package
> - Added support for printing executed SQL statement as debug logs.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
#### `persist` package

- Added support for printing executed SQL statement as debug logs.
```

- Added support for executing native queries in SQL databases.
- Improved advanced filter query support for SQL databases to filter at DB level.

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%222201.8.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Developer tools updates

### New features

#### Language Server

- Added custom completions for HTTP services.

#### CLI

- Added a new `bal tool` command to manage tools that extend the functionality of the CLI. Tools can be pulled from Ballerina Central and are managed using the `bal tool` command. For more information, see [CLI commands](/learn/cli-commands/).

> #### OpenAPI tool
> - Added support to generate Ballerina client and service declarations from OpenAPI v3.1.x definitions.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
#### OpenAPI tool

- Added support to generate Ballerina client and service declarations from OpenAPI v3.1.x definitions.
```

- Introduced a code action to change the variable type of a `let` expression.
- Introduced a code action to create a function for the expression of a `select` clause.
- Improved completions in the service declaration node context.
- Improved the LS simulator.

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake) of the repositories below.

- [Language Server](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-lang/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3ATeam%2FLanguageServer+milestone%3A2201.8.0+is%3Aclosed+label%3AType%2FBug+)
- [OpenAPI](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/openapi-tools/issues?q=is%3Aissue+label%3AType%2FBug+milestone%3A%22Swan+Lake+2201.8.0%22+is%3Aclosed)

## Ballerina packages updates

### New features

The Swan Lake Update 8 release introduces support for incorporating custom user repositories into the package management system in addition to the Ballerina Central repository. 

This feature empowers you to configure multiple repositories within the `<USER_HOME>/.ballerina/Settings.toml` file.
Now, you can both publish your packages to your preferred repositories and retrieve packages from these repositories. 

> Furthermore, you can seamlessly utilize these packages during the package-building process by explicitly defining dependencies in the Ballerina.toml file.

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
Furthermore, you can seamlessly utilize these packages during the package-building process by explicitly defining dependencies in the `Ballerina.toml` file.
```

- Added support for generating a subgraph SDL schema at compile time.

#### `log` package

- Made adjustments to the behavior of the log print functions when an error object is provided for the `error` key. In the previous version, it would only display the error message. However, in the updated version, it now provides more detailed information, including both the error message and the stack trace for the current error, as well as any underlying errors that contributed to the current error.
- Removed the extra space that was printed between the key and value when printing in logFMT format.

#### `persist` package

- Added support for printing executed SQL statement as debug logs.
- Added support for executing native queries in SQL databases.
- Improved advanced filter query support for SQL databases to filter at DB level.

### Bug fixes

To view bug fixes, see the [GitHub milestone for 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake)](https://github.com/ballerina-platform/ballerina-standard-library/issues?q=is%3Aclosed+is%3Aissue+milestone%3A%222201.8.0%22+label%3AType%2FBug).

## Developer tools updates

### New features

#### Language Server

- Added custom completions for HTTP services.

#### CLI

> - Added a new `bal tool` command to manage tools that extend the functionality of the CLI. Tools can be pulled from Ballerina Central and are managed using the `bal tool` command. For more information, see [CLI commands](/learn/cli-commands/).

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
- Added a new `bal tool` command to manage tools that extend the functionality of the CLI. Tools can be pulled from the Ballerina Central and are managed using the `bal tool` command. For more information, see [CLI commands](/learn/cli-commands/).
```

---
layout: ballerina-left-nav-release-notes
title: 2201.8.0 (Swan Lake) 
permalink: /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0/
active: 2201.8.0
redirect_from: 
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0-swan-lake/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/2201.8.0-swan-lake
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes/
    - /downloads/swan-lake-release-notes
---

## Overview of Ballerina Swan Lake Update 8 (2201.8.0)

> <em>2201.8.0 (Swan Lake Update 8) is the eighth update release of Ballerina Swan Lake, and it includes a new set of features and significant improvements to the compiler, runtime, Ballerina library, and developer tooling. It is based on the 2023R1 version of the Language Specification.</em> 

Author: Updated.

        }

        // Define a prefetch function.
        isolated function preBooks(graphql:Context ctx) {
            dataloader:DataLoader bookLoader = ctx.getDataLoader("bookLoader");
            // Add the primary key of the data to be fetched to the dataloader.
            bookLoader.add(self.author.id);
        }

        isolated resource function get books(graphql:Context ctx) returns Book[]|error {
            dataloader:DataLoader bookLoader = ctx.getDataLoader("bookLoader");
            // Obtain the data from the dataloader using the primary key of the data.
            BookRow[] bookRows = check bookLoader.get(self.author.id);
            return from BookRow bookRow in bookRows
                select {id: bookRow.id, title: bookRow.title};
        }
    }
    ```

### Deprecations

#### `graphql` package

- Deprecated the `executeWithType()` method of the `graphql:Client`.

### Improvements

#### `graphql` package

- Added support for the `@deprecated` directive in output objects defined using record types.
- Added support for printing the GraphQL URL to `stdout`.
- Added support for generating a subgraph SDL schema at compile time.

#### `log` package

> - Made adjustments to the behavior of the log print functions when an error object is provided for the `error` key. Updated the previous version, which displayed only the error message to now provide more detailed information, including both the error message and the stack trace for the current error as well as any underlying errors that contributed to the current error.

Reviewer: Second sentence seems not correct with the placement of `now`?

Author: It gives the meaning that the previous version is updated to the newer version now.

Reviewer: `Updated the previous version, which displayed only the error message to now provide more detailed information..`

Isn't it better to word is as follows

`Updated the previous version, which displayed only the error message to provide more detailed information now...`

having `to now` seems confusing
